
```
                     ________
M               M   /_  __/ /  ___
M M           M M    / / / _ \/ -_)
M M M       M M M   /_/_/_//_/\__/         __        ____
M M M M   M M M M     /  |/  /__ ________ / /  ___ _/ / /
M M M M M M M M M    / /|_/ / _ `/ __(_-</ _ \/ _ `/ / /
M M M M M M M M M   /_/__/_/\_,_/_/ /___/_//_/\_,_/_/_/  
M M M M M M M M M     / _ \_______    (_)__ ____/ /_
M M M M M M M M M    / ___/ __/ _ \  / / -_) __/ __/
M M M M M M M M M   /_/  /_/  \___/_/ /\__/\__/\__/
                                 |___/  
```

#Preying on Prisoners
##Texas staff sexual misconduct prosecutions

In Texas, sexual contact between staff and inmates is a felony, punishable by up to two years in prison. Domenic Hidalgo, a prison nurse caught bribing a prisoner with drugs for sex, was facing up to 10 years behind bars. But Hidalgo avoided prison altogether by pleading guilty in exchange for a $500 fine and four years on probation. If he stays out of trouble, his felony conviction will be removed from his criminal record in 2017.

The plea deal Hidalgo received for sexual contact with a prisoner is typical in Texas, and illustrates how rare it is for prison staff there to be imprisoned for sexually abusing the people in their charge. Since 2000, the state prison system’s inspector general has referred nearly 400 cases of staff sex crimes against inmates to prosecutors. An analysis by The Marshall Project found that prosecutors refused to pursue almost half of those cases. Of 126 prison workers, mostly correctional officers, convicted of sexual misconduct or assault, just nine were sentenced to serve time in state jail. The majority of the rest received fines ranging from $200 to $4,000 and a few years on a type of probation called deferred adjudication, which results in a clean criminal record if conditions are met.

Our story, "[Preying on Prisoners](https://www.themarshallproject.org/2015/06/17/preying-on-prisoners)," published on June 17, 2015, examined how Texas has handled cases of staff sexual misconduct in its prisons.

Included in this repo is a csv of the [data](/data) collected, cleaned and analyzed by reporter Alysia Santo and deputy managing editor Tom Meagher.

##Data sources and caveats
We began by requesting from the [Texas Department of Criminal Justice's Office of Inspector General](http://www.tdcj.state.tx.us/divisions/oig/) (OIG) a list of all the cases sent to prosecutors between 2000 to 2014 for three main classes of sex crimes: [Sexual assault](http://codes.lp.findlaw.com/txstatutes/PE/5/22/22.011), [aggravated sexual assault](http://codes.lp.findlaw.com/txstatutes/PE/5/22/22.021) and [improper sexual activity with person in custody](http://codes.lp.findlaw.com/txstatutes/PE/8/39/39.04). The office provided four spreadsheets from various iterations of its database. We took all the cases that went beyond an initial referral—cases that led to indictment, acquittal, conviction or sentencing—and asked the state's Special Prosecution Unit to provide the outcomes and sentences for those people. After that, we spent months vetting those cases and inquiring with other agencies in the state to fill in as many of the blanks missing from the data as possible.

There are several caveats to be aware of when looking at this data. Over time, the OIG changed the way it recorded dates, as well as how it classified employees of the system, whether correctional officers, employees or contractors. One of the biggest caveats is to keep in mind that *cases do not equal people*. One person may have more than one case number. And similarly one case number may be assigned to more than one suspect. Texas officials would not release the names of those accused whose cases prosecutors declined to pursue or who a grand jury did not indict.

##Walkthrough

###Columns in the CSV

* case_num: The OIG's case number for investigations they send to the Special Prosecution Unit.
* case_open_date: Values from newer OIG database that begins in 2009.
* incident_date: Dates logged in earlier OIG database, from 2000-2008
* Person: The name of the prison worker where available. In cases that prosecutors declined or a jury did not indict, no name was released.
* Person_last: Generated by The Marshall Project
* Person_first: Generated by The Marshall Project
* employee_type: This code changed between the OIG's database. These are not as specific as you'd probably like.
* disposition: This categorization of the disposition of each case in the judicial process came from the OIG, supplemented with additional reporting.
* Violation_1_clean: Cleaned and standardized column of each case's most severe charge
* violation_type: Categorization of the statutes each of these charges were filed under, created by The Marshall Project
* Counts: For those defendants who had multiple records with the same charge, The Marshall Project generated this column to count how many charges they faced.
* Violation_2: Mostly empty column of secondary charges in a case, where applicable.
* Unit_name: The OIG reported the facility of each case using a unit code. This field was generaged by The Marshall Project using [this directory](http://tdcj.state.tx.us/unit_directory/) and additional reporting.
* Unit_code: From OIG's data.
* Operator: For those facilities we were able to identify, The Marshall Project added this information on whether the state prison system or private companies run the prison.
* Gender: Added by The Marshall Project From the TDCJ unit directory.
* Facility_Type: Added by The Marshall Project From the TDCJ unit directory.
* Region: Added by The Marshall Project From the TDCJ unit directory.
* County: Added by The Marshall Project From the TDCJ unit directory.
* sentenced: For those cases where a conviction or guilty plea was had, the Special Prosecution Unit provided this free form listing of the defendant's sentence.
* sentence_cat: Created by The Marshall Project, we use this to standardize the categories of the sentenced column.

##Contributors
* Tom Meagher
* Alysia Santo

##Bugs
If you have questions about the data, please email Tom at ```tmeagher@themarshallproject.org``` or file a [Github issue](https://github.com/themarshallproject/tx-prosecutions/issues).
